[Filebeat/Filestream] Delete ingested log files on EOF or inactive (#43368)
elastic/beats: docs/reference/filebeat/delete-file-guide.md

# Removing files after ingestion

::::{warning}

> Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to data loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.
```

# Removing files after ingestion

::::{warning}
Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to data loss.
::::

The Filestream input can remove files after they have been fully
ingested, three requirements need to be met before the Filestream
input can remove a file:
1. The reader for the file needs to be closed;
2. All events from the file have been published (acknowledged by the

>    output);

Reviewer 2: suggestion only, not a blocking comment.

This is correct, but the terms are pretty specific to how things are named in our implementation.  I'm thinking it might be useful to use more generic terms that closer to how a user "sees" the flow.

1. conditions have been met for filestream to close the file.  This is controlled by the `close.*` options.
2. events from the file have been received by the configured output without error.  (example elasticsearch output has indexed event or logstash has written event to persistent queue)
3. the `delete.grace_period` has expired.  This means nothing happened for filestream to re-open the file during that time.  The most common thing to cause filestream to re-open the file is adding data to it.

# Removing files after ingestion

::::{warning}
Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to data loss.
::::

The Filestream input can remove files after they have been fully
ingested, three requirements need to be met before the Filestream
input can remove a file:
1. The reader for the file needs to be closed;
2. All events from the file have been published (acknowledged by the
   output);
3. No data has been added to the file since the last event was
   published.

## How it works

> Once a reader for a file is closed, either by reaching EOF (end of

Author: Thanks for catching this! I was using AI to improve the text and forgot to remove one of the versions.

file) or due to inactivity, Filestream will check if all events have
been published, if this is true, then it will wait for the configured
grace period, check if no new data has been added to the file, by
comparing its current size with the size when the last event was read,
then it will try to remove the file.

When a file reader is closed, either because it reached the end of the
file (EOF) or due to inactivity, Filestream will check if all
events have been published. If all events are published, it will wait
for the configured grace period. After the grace period, it will compare the
file's current size with its size when the last event was read to
ensure no new data has been added. If no new data has been added, then
it will attempt to remove the file.

> If any of the checks fail, the harvester is closed. One the next

Author: No, they're not. Those concepts are sprinkled throughout our documentation, but not properly defined :weary: 

The reader only reads the file, the harvester uses the reader to read the file and publish the events, the way our implementation wors:
- A reader is created, then a harvester is created having the reader as an argument
- The reader reads the file until EOF or Inactivity is reached, then it closed
- The harvester detects it and handles it appropriately (finishes, tries to remove the file, etc)

I rephrased it not to mention the reader any more, let me know what you think.

file system scan happens, a new harvester, and reader, will be
started, once the close condition (EOF or inactivity) is met, then the
remove process will start again.

Once all checks are successful the file is removed.

## EOF x Inactivity
Filestream's reader can be configured to close on two conditions: EOF
and inactivity, each one has a different purpose:
 - EOF: it is recommended for files that do not have data appended to
   them, like a cronjob that when it is done copies the file to a
   folder where Filestream can read it;
 - Inactive: it is recommended for files that have data appended to
   them, like long running process that does not performs its own log
   rotation.
 
::::{note}

> Even for short lived process that write their own log file within a

Author: Not really. The grace period is an extra safety to ensure the file is not removed by accident with data that has not been ingested. There was a long discussion about it. The practical difference is that inactive will keep the reader open and respond to data being added very quickly, however the grace period happens after the reader has been closed, so any addition to the file will take `grace period + scan interval` to be picked up.

If files are not written at once/already exist and no data is being added, the `delete.on_close.inactive` should be used.

few seconds, avoid using EOF because Filestream might read until EOF
before the last entries are written to the file.
::::

## Examples
### Log files from old cronjobs
Filebeat will be used to ingest log files from old cronjobs, all files
have been fully written and Filebeat should remove them once it
finishes publishing all data. The log files are located at
`/var/log/cronjobs/*.log`.

For that the Filestream with delete on EOF will be used, the input
configuration is:
```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: cronjobs-logs
    paths:
      - /var/log/cronjobs/*.log
    delete.on_close.eof: true
    delete.grace_period: 0s
```

### Log files from long running tasks

> Filebeat will be used to ingest log files from tasks that run for a

Author: Thanks, I'll re-write it.

few minutes, appending to their log files, if the tasks are still
running log entries are added every few seconds. Once no more entries
have been added for a few minutes, it is safe to remove the log file. The
log files are located at `/var/log/long-tasks/*.log`.

For this case Filestream can be configured to remove files after a
period of inactivity, the simplest configuration is:

```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: long-tasks-logs
    paths:
      - /var/log/long-tasks/*.log
    delete.on_close.inactive: true
    delete.grace_period: 0s
```

> Because `delete.on_close.inactive: true` the time to consider a file

Reviewer 3: This side effect seems strange to me. It seems like a precaution, but it has unrelated side effects. If `harvester_limit` is in use, does this mean the input may be unable to advance to new files for 30 minutes because these files are occupying the harvester/file descriptor waiting to see if they stay inactive long enough? Isn't this logically equivalent but strictly less efficient than:

```
delete.on_close.eof: true
delete.grace_period: 30m
```

(For that matter, in the big picture, why do we need two logically distinct delete flags for inactivity vs eof? We never delete _before_ EOF, or before closing the harvester, so why do we need more options than just `delete.on_close` and `delete.grace_period`?)

Author: > This side effect seems strange to me. It seems like a precaution, but it has unrelated side effects.

Do you mean the default inactivity timeout based on `delete.on_close.inactive: true`?. Yes it is a precaution. I'm also not a fan of it either.

>  If harvester_limit is in use, does this mean the input may be unable to advance to new files for 30 minutes because these files are occupying the harvester/file descriptor waiting to see if they stay inactive long enough? 

Yes, that's exactly the case.

> (For that matter, in the big picture, why do we need two logically distinct delete flags for inactivity vs eof? We never delete before EOF, or before closing the harvester, so why do we need more options than just `delete.on_close` and `delete.grace_period`?)

Technically, we delete the file after the reader is closed, but before the harvester is closed. However that's an implementation detail. We only remove the file once we stop reading from it.

> why do we need two logically distinct delete flags for inactivity vs eof?

That is a product requirement for extra safety. I tried to convince otherwise at the time, but I did not succeed. One of the main things with this feature is really to be conservative and avoid at all costs to remove a file by accident. With the focus on being conservative and avoiding removing files by accident, then the trade-off is reasonable.

Reviewer: > That is a product requirement for extra safety. I tried to convince otherwise at the time, but I did not succeed. One of the main things with this feature is really to be conservative and avoid at all costs to remove a file by accident. With the focus on being conservative and avoiding removing files by accident, then the trade-off is reasonable.

I don't think it's a product requirement. I think it started as two use cases for file deletion:

1. You start Filebeat to read logs output by a batch job. All files are static and completely written before Filebeat starts. This is the case where a grace period of zero (or close to it) is safe.
2.You start Filebeat and want it to watch a directory, ingest Files that are actively written, and delete them once they are done. 

This has ended up as two separate configuration flags, but reading the configuration I also increasingly agree that we probably only need EOF+grace period. If you don't understand the implementation of Filebeat it's not clear why the `inactive` flag exists or when you should use it. You are never going to delete a file before EOF.

Author: I've removed this bit and only use the inactive on an example of an long running process that keeps adding data to the file.

inactive and close the reader is automatically set to 30 minutes. This
can be overwritten to a short or longer time, e.g: 5 minutes.

```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: long-tasks-logs
    paths:
      - /var/log/long-tasks/*.log
    delete.on_close.inactive: true
    close.on_state_change.inactive: 5m
    delete.grace_period: 0s
```

### Waiting before removing log files
It is also possible to configure a grace period to wait after the
all events have been published before removing the file. Note that
this is different than the 'close on inactive' because the inactivity
timeout for the reader does not consider if an event has been

> published, this means a file can be closed due to inactivity (no more

Reviewer 3: Giving the grace period a different semantic meaning than the inactivity timer seems confusing / complicated. If we've fully read a file and it's been idle for 12 hours while the ES connection was down, and the connection comes back up and we finish ingesting all of the file's data, and it's still idle, why would we still want to wait an extra grace period instead of deleting immediately? Don't we just want to wait until both the file is fully ingested and it has been idle/closed for the configured grace period? The grace period should be configured based on file access patterns, so it doesn't seem like it should be affected by how fast ingestion is proceeding, and this interaction makes the configuration harder to explain.

Author: > Don't we just want to wait until both the file is fully ingested and it has been idle/closed for the configured grace period? The grace period should be configured based on file access patterns, so it doesn't seem like it should be affected by how fast ingestion is proceeding (...)

That's the role of close on inactive.

I'm happy to discuss more about it, I'm not a fan of this grace period. Maybe my arguments at the time were not good enough.

# Removing files after ingestion

::::{warning}
Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.
::::

The Filestream input can remove files after they have been fully
ingested, three requirements need to be met before the Filestream
input can remove a file:
1. Filestream has closed the file due to inactivity or because EOF has
   been reached. This is controlled by:
     - `close.on_state_change.inactive`
     - `close.reader.on_eof`
2. Events from the file have been received by the configured output
   without error. (example the Elasticsearch output has indexed all
   events or logstash has written event to persistent queue).
3. The `delete.grace_period` has expired and the file has not changed
   during the grace period.

## How it works
Once a reader for a file is closed, either by reaching EOF (end of
file) or due to inactivity, Filestream will check if all events have
been published, if this is true, then it will wait for the configured
grace period, check if no new data has been added to the file, by
comparing its current size with the size when the last event was read,

> then it will try to remove the file. During the grace period Filebeat

Reviewer 3: That change looks mostly good, I'd suggest:

"Filebeat monitors the file for changes, if the file size changes..." -> "Filebeat monitors the file. If the file size changes..."

"the file will be picked up in..." -> "the file will resume ingesting after..."

# Removing files after ingestion

::::{warning}

> Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This feature might lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.
```

::::

> The Filestream input can remove files after they have been fully

Reviewer 4: Consider adding a substitution here for `Filestream`, such as `fs`: https://github.com/elastic/beats/blob/main/docs/docset.yml

Author: > This feature is always on by default then?

No, it is off by default.

> Shouldn't we start by stating what's the default state and how to control it?

It kinda was like that, the very first sentence was:
```
Enabling this feature will remove files, which could lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.
```

But then you suggested updating it to:
```
This feature might lead to unintentional data loss if not configured correctly.
```

I'm fine either way. To me it is very clear it's disabled by default because later we show that to enable the feature we need to set `delete.enabled: true`. But I wrote the whole thing, so I'm biased when comes to understanding how it works.

Reviewer 4: I suggest a start like this: "By default, Filestream input doesn't delete files. If **option** is turned on, Filestream input can delete files under these conditions... "

> ingested. Three requirements need to be met before the Filestream
> input can remove a file:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ingested. Filestream input can remove a file only if one of the following conditions apply:
```

Author: That's actually changing the meaning @theletterf. All three requirements need to be met for the file to be removed. Maybe:
```
Filestream input can remove a file only if all of the following conditions apply:
```

> 1. Filestream has closed the file due to inactivity or because EOF has

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Filestream has closed the file due to inactivity or because end-of-file (EOF) has
```

   been reached. This is controlled by:
     - `close.on_state_change.inactive`
     - `close.reader.on_eof`

> 2. Events from the file have been received by the configured output
>    without error. (example the Elasticsearch output has indexed all
>    events or logstash has written event to persistent queue).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Events from the file have been received by the configured output
   without error. For example, the Elasticsearch output has indexed all
   events or logstash has written event to persistent queue.
```

> 3. The `delete.grace_period` has expired and the file has not changed

Author: 30 minutes. That's stated in the [actual feature documentation](https://docs-v3-preview.elastic.dev/elastic/beats/pull/43368/reference/filebeat/filebeat-input-filestream#filebeat-input-filestream-delete-grace-period). 

But I'm not opposed to also add it here.

   them, like a cronjob that when it is done copies the file to a
   folder where Filestream can read it;
 - Inactivity: it is recommended for files that have data appended to
   them, like a long running process that does not performs its own log
   rotation.
 
::::{note}
When using close on EOF for files from short lived process that write
their logs within a few seconds, make sure to set an appropriate grace
period (default: 30 minutes) because even immutable copied files may
still "change" while being copied, especially across volumes or
network shares.
::::

## Examples
### Removing log files from old cronjobs
Filebeat will be used to ingest log files from old cronjobs, all files
have been fully written and Filebeat should remove them once it
finishes publishing all data. The log files are located at
`/var/log/cronjobs/*.log`. Once Filebeat finishes reading each file,
it will wait for 30min (the default), then delete them.

For that the Filestream with delete on EOF will be used, the input
configuration is:
```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: cronjobs-logs
    paths:
      - /var/log/cronjobs/*.log
    close.reader.on_eof: true
    delete:
      enabled: true

> ```

Author: I'm not quite sure about the "Deletes on EOF" note here. The actual meaning of this line is: "Close the file on EOF", which is a feature that has existed in Filestream since a long time, we happen to build upon its behaviour for the delete feature.

> ```

Reviewer 4: Just wanted to move this from the intro text to the snippet — I edited my suggestion.

#### Step-by-Step
1. Filebeat is configured with the above input and the Elasticsearch
   output.
2. Filebeat is started.
3. The Filestream input starts.
4. The prospector scans `/var/log/cronjobs/*.log` for files and finds
   all files.
5. A harvester is started for each file:
   1. The reader is started.
   2. The file is read until EOF.
   3. The reader closes because `close.reader.on_eof` is set to `true`.
   4. The harvester checks that all events have been published.
   5. If not all events have been published, the harvester is closed
      and it will be restarted in the next scan.
   6. If all events have been published, the grace period starts
      counting.
   7. If data is added to the file while waiting the grace period, the
      harvester is closed.
   8. Once the grace period expires, the file is checked once again
      for new data.
   9. If there was no change to the file, it is removed, otherwise the
      harvester is closed.

If Filebeat fails to remove the file, it will retry up to 5 times with
a constant backoff of 2 seconds. If all attempts fail, the harvester

> is closed and a new harvester will be started in the next scan.

Author: I think I found a nice way to present it.

```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: long-tasks-logs
    paths:
      - /var/log/long-tasks/*.log
    close.on_state_change.inactive: 5m # That's the default, it can be omitted
    delete:
      enabled: true
```

### Waiting before removing log files
It is also possible to configure a grace period to wait after the
file has been closed and all events have been published before
removing the file. Note that this is different than the 'close on
inactive' because the inactivity timeout for the reader does not
consider if an event has been published, this means that a file can be
closed due to inactivity (no more data read from it) even if some of
its events are still in Filebeat's publishing queue. In this example
we want to remove files 5 minutes after all events have been published
and we know the files never have data appended to them. For that we
can use the EOF condition and configure a grace period.

```yaml
  - type: filestream
    id: other-jobs
    paths:
      - /var/log/misc/*.log
    close.reader.on_eof: true
    delete:
      enabled: true
      grace_period: 5m
```

The grace period will be counted after the harvester ensured all

> events from the file have been published.

Author: I accepted it mostly as is, but I'll add it in a separated commit.

::::{tip}
Both `delete.grace_period` and `close.on_state_change.inactive` will
cause Filestream to wait after reading the last entry from the file,
however `close.on_state_change.inactive` will keep the reader open, so
new entries to the file can be quickly (almost in real time) picked
up, while `delete.grace_period` makes Filestream wait after the reader
has been closed and all events published, if new data is added to the
file, the harvester will be closed, then only on the next scan from
the file system new data will be picked up. While waiting for the
grace period to expire the harvesters checks the file for new data at
the same interval as the prospector, which is configured using
[`prospector.scanner.check_interval`](/reference/filebeat/filebeat-input-filestream.md#filebeat-input-filestream-scan-frequency).

> ::::

Author: Indeed. Rereading it I realise it is more of an important note/thing to keep in mind rather than a tip.

I'm not quite sure about the best place to put it... I ended up adding it to the end so the user gets to it after learning everything about the delete process and is better equipped to understand the trade off.

I changed from tip to important, do you think it helps? Or should it be in another place/under its own header?
